Part 1 - Mean, Deviation, Total Sums of Squares, Variance, Standard Deviation

If we were in the business of making predictions about a new data point, and we knew nothing else except old data of the same type, then the most sensible thing we could do is to predict that the new data point would be at the mean of the old data points. If I wanted to guess how much an unseen dog might weigh, and I had a dataset with 1000 dog's weights, my best move would be to guess the average of those weights. This would be our best guess, but it wouldn't necessarily be a good guess. 

By looking at the spread of the data we can start to get a sense of how bad our guess might be. We can do this by calculating the mean and then observe how distant every one of the data points is from that mean. We would be asking the question, if we guess the mean for every existing data point, how wrong would we be? The difference between a data point and the mean of data is called the deviation. So we start by calculating  all of the deviations then we wind up with a big list of errors. Then what do we do with the list? Well, what we want is to turn the list intoa single metric that can tell us how wrong we are likely to be if we guess the mean. 

Consider for a moment, a dataset where there are 100 data points, all of which are exactly at the mean of the data set. If we calculate all the deviations for this data set, we would wind up with 100 zeros. In contrast, consider a data set of 100 data points where exactly half of the data is 100 points higher than the mean, and half is 100 points lower than the mean. If we calculate the deviations, we get exactly 50 values that are +100 and 50 values that are -100. For the first data set, we are not wrong at all, all of our predictions are perfect. For the second data set, the mean is always wrong by 100 points. If we simply sum the deviations, the data sets appear identical, in that both sum to zero. This is not unique to these datasets. The mean of any data set will always exist exactly at the point where the positive and negative deviations balance exactly. 

So, we cannot simply sum the deviations to create a metric of wrongness, because the sum of the deviations will always be zero. What we can do instead is square the deviations. This has two effects. First, the negative deviations all become positive, and will no longer cancel out the positive deviations. Second, larger deviations are amplified. For example, a deviation of 10 squared becomes 100; a deviation of 100 squared becomes 10000. This metric will disproportionately punish bigger errors.

Adding together (summing) all of the squared deviations produces a metric called the Total Sum of Squares (TSS). If we calculate the TSS for our first data set, it is 0. The TSS for our second dataset is 250000. We now have a metric for comparing how wrong we are when we use the mean to make predictions about a dataset. 

However, if we use this method, then adding more data points to a dataset will almost always increase the TSS. Imagine our second dataset but we doubled the number of data points, now we've got 100 at +100 and 100 points at -100. The TSS would also double, but, on average any given prediction we made wouldn't be more wrong. 

A better metric would tell us how wrong we were on average. If we divide the TSS by the number of data points, we can get the average sum of squared deviations. This metric is known as the variance. The variance of our first data set is zero. The variance for our second data set is 2500. If we tripled the number of data points in our second data set, but they kept the same pattern as before, the TSS would increase, but the variance would stay 2500. 

We can simplify this metric one step further. TSS and Variance are both in squared units. If we take the square root of the variance,we put our average error metric back into the original units of assessment. The square root of the variance is also known as the standard deviation. The standard deviation is one of the most widely used statistics in all of data science. It gives us a single number,  in the original units of our data, that summarizes how wrong we would be on average if we guessed the mean for every data point. A small standard deviation tells us that the data huddles close to the mean. A large standard deviation tells us the data is spread out, and the mean is a poor predictor.    

> **Note:** When we calculated the variance, we divided the TSS by the total number of data points ($N$). In practice, you will often see the variance calculated by dividing the TSS by the total number of data points minus one ($N-1$). Just using $N$ produces a variance that tends to underestimate the actual population variance. Since we will almost always be working with samples and won't have complete population data, $N-1$ is most commonly used as the divisor to better estimate the population variance. I am not going to go further into the details of why this works in this class. When you see $N$ or $N-1$ in the divisor, I want you to think of the same basic concept: we are dividing by the size of the dataset to find an average. In this case, we are calculating the variance, which is the average squared deviation (error). If you want to know more details about why this is done [read here about Bessel's correction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bessel%27s_correction). 

